power supplies are basically completely
unavailable on retailers right now at
least most of them are and so we've had
a lot of our viewers asking us to
investigate where the power supplies
have gone and when we can expect to see
them coming back to wide-scale retail
availability in the process of so doing
we've also learned that video cards and
motherboards are becoming rarer to find
these days as well so the easy answer to
where'd it all go is obviously human
malware but there's a whole lot more
nuance to it than that and we've spoken
with manufacturing sources on record and
off record we also have a ton of
manufacturing experience ourselves the
mod mats we've been making for a couple
of years now and that involves the same
process they go through just with a
different type of product so we've got a
lot of first-hand experience we can add
to this but we're gonna be digging into
the nuance today alongside information
on when you can expect the computer
hardware components to normalize in
retail availability and when you should
be looking at stores for purchasing them
we also have interesting information on
things like the average margin for a
power supply and some of the usual
timelines for making them so there's
some cool information in here that you
can learn from that's just interesting
to know before that this video is
brought to you by msi on the zi 490
unify ITX motherboard for Intel 10
series CPUs the MSI z4 90 unify ITX
board benefits from a memory layout that
makes memory overclocking easy
positioning the board well for
enthusiasts who want to think around a
bench or in an ITX system the MSI z4 90
unify runs 90 amp hour stages a 10 layer
PCB and seats the memory as close to the
socket as possible all of which benefit
the overclocking experience learn more
at the link in the description below so
power supplies again are either low
availability or not available at all
right now it's a comment a tweet we've
seen constantly over the last couple of
weeks people asking us to investigate it
and so that's what we've done we've
toured a lot of factories over the last
couple of years we have a whole factory
tour series on the channel and we have
contact with a lot of those still so
we've gotten information from various
places for this couple of notes we're
gonna have some filler b-roll in here of
factories of power supplies things like
that relevant products and when the
b-roll pops up of that product it
doesn't mean anything about where the
information came from if we're quoting
someone and there's
doesn't necessarily mean it came from
that source the video editors for this
video have no idea with whom I spoke to
get the information for the video so
they're isolated from it and it's
basically whatever they show is just
gonna be to fill the space so it's
randomly selected there's no implication
of who provided the information okay so
first off we need to talk about the
usual manufacturing delays around the
first half of the year and first
remember that Lunar New Year affects
shipping and production timelines
annually every year sometime between end
of January and beginning of March
roughly most of the industry stops
manufacturing things for a little while
kicking off manufacturing runs in
January and splitting them around Lunar
New Year can also be challenging this is
something we avoid at our own company
because different workers will be on
staff before and after the holiday and
different supervisors will be there that
means that quality can change mid run
which causes QC issues and other
challenges where you might have to get
new samples most companies try to not
split manufacturing orders around the
holiday which means there's already a
strain on supply that expected delay
compounded with a few things this year
first of all with the virus China
extended Chinese New Year the State
Council announced the extension for
several of its major municipalities
including Shanghai Suzhou Nanjing Russia
Ning boi and critically a couple of
other major factory districts like
Guangzhou and Shenzhen most PC part
manufacturers happened to be in
Guangzhou Shenzhen
dong-gwon and the Guangdong province
near the ports there's extended holidays
there and so manufacturing didn't really
get started again until about February
5th to 15th and even in that window
workforce was slow to return and the
factories operated at low capacity this
is true normally but it was amplified
this year factories were also getting
inspected by government for health and
in some cases factories were shut down
if they had an instance of human malware
outbreak where they needed to be shut
down for full cleaning that man saw
these factories weren't really up and
operating at capacity again until March
so we had a three month window of low or
zero supply which meant running off of
whatever was in the warehouses at the
time that this all started for
perspective most cooler case and power
supply manufacturers are either in hue
Jo Shenton
or elsewhere in the quantum province and
they were all affected one factory that
we've worked with isn't annette and
taiwan and was mostly unaffected by all
this but even though they could operate
at high capacity the real problem was
that they couldn't get all those small
parts that go through that some tea
lines all the pick-and-place components
that get Gatling gun Don to the PCBs are
made in either China or Japan for the
most part and that meant no supply even
for factories outside of China like the
one in China the next issue was shipping
with the factories operon operating
again the next challenge obviously was
getting the product out of the country
and to wherever they need to go Europe
the u.s. South America or elsewhere and
so the ports were completely jammed with
products that was amplified by a massive
and higher-priority influx of things
like PPE and other essential products so
the easing further of environmental
regulations in China helped to increase
the factory capacity and the amount of
work they could output but knock-on
effects obviously not discussed in this
piece but the result of that further was
compounding the limited availability of
shipping space and freight space in
boats there just weren't enough vehicles
to take products out of the country
commercial passenger jets often take
Freight alongside passenger baggage in
public information the USPS u.s.
shipping service has leased space on
upwards of 15,000 passenger flights per
day during normal operations for the
past few years out of the normal
operation previous 25,000 flights per
day commercial airlines make up to 10%
of their gross revenue on freight
transport if you look at any of the
investor call documents with none of
those flights in the year now because
passengers aren't flying or are flying
at reduced volume the freight space is
lost and air shipping becomes
prohibitively expensive and relegated
mostly to large freight hauler planes or
to boat we've experienced this ourselves
with the mod maps in a previous news
video we talked about this where
typically we air freight our mod mats if
we can to try and get them in to keep up
with the back orders because we don't
want people waiting too long to get
their item that they've ordered and we
know as customers what it feels like
that's still a small company so I'm very
close
being a customer of the product that I
make so we air freight them and this
time air frating was four to five times
the cost can't really give exact numbers
but suffice to say it was over 10 grand
to import the mats this time and most of
that was the shipping cost so typically
we're significantly under that but you
end up in a scenario where with
something like a power supply where they
have less margin they really can't
afford to just throw it on a plane and
air freight it especially now we lost
almost all of our margin by doing that
and we're a smaller company so it's
easier for us to do so that's why you
see power supply companies who have a
heavy object that the ship in going by
boat now you can do Express Freight to
LA via boat and truck it across the
country as a middle step but typically
with ocean freight for us on the East
Coast you see times of 45 to 60 days
arrival with express freight it goes to
LA and then you take a truck across the
country that's it cuts it down by about
10 days with air freight it's something
like 7 to 10 days to the East Coast so
times are a little shorter for LA where
most of the companies are importing
their stuff but you get the idea there
is another problem though and that's
that ocean freight has extremely limited
capacity right now so even if you want
to put your products on a boat and
you're ok with that
you can't there's not enough space one
of the top two power supply sellers in
the u.s. the top two company is one of
those in the listing of highest sales
told us that they have containers on
basically every boat coming into port in
California right now a power supply
container on every single one of those
boats the problem is though they wanted
to buy more space on each boat but the
space is being reserved for other things
like PPE shipments so they can't compete
with that they can't just buy the space
out from under them and other essentials
are on there too so this means that some
ships can only fit one to three
containers of power supplies on them and
once those arrive to port some retailers
like Newegg and micro Center they buy
their products that they sell often by
the container so container gets off the
ship the truck comes and picks it up and
that truck brings it straight to new AG
or whomever it may be
and drops it off and that's the end of
its journey then it gets listed on the
site and it all
disappears within hours so that's why
you're seeing such limited availability
of the product note that free is also
charged by either dim weight or just
weight whichever is worse for the
importer so that means that the size of
the power supply matters less than the
weight here while the size of our mod
mats matters more than the weight
although both are high in this instance
power supplies are talking about
something that's maybe six pounds that's
not cheap to ship by air and they don't
have the margin power supply margin is
about 10 to 15 percent depending on the
PSU with the average closer to 15
percent this is information that we
collected off record through
manufacturing contacts in the industry
and we just averaged the bulk of them
there's a heavy brick of steel that's
the power supply and it's already
expensive to ship on pallets and it's a
race to the bottom of margin industry
where everybody's competing with each
other so that's what you end up with an
off record contact answered our question
about PSU logistical challenges and
availability as follows quote PSU is our
heavy and take a lot of space we
typically don't want to air freight them
and right now there are fewer flights
and most of those are filled with PPE
it took a while for the supply chain to
get back up and running after Chinese
New Year and then the human malware shut
down in China but after a month that got
back up for the most part unfortunately
the sea freight was shut down as well
and also became backed up there's
actually more freight to move then there
is boats to move it while usually we
could bring a couple dozen containers
into port we might be lucky if we could
bring a couple period right now air
freight is up like 5x another source
told us that they also had issues with
limited shipping space on the boats
today factories are actually able for
the most part to meet order volume but
they can't get the shipments out of the
country fast enough so it doesn't matter
another off record source told us the
consumer side of this quote ever since
stimulus checks hit demand has been
insane demand is significantly higher
than this time last year this is
normally the slow period and there's a
long lead time on new orders doing some
further research then on the industry we
looked into what that means give us
perspective was basically the follow up
to all of that information so we learned
that right now there's roughly 25%
higher demand than this time last year
year over year 2019 to 2020 the demand
is unexpectedly high for this period
for further perspective May of 2020 has
so far for some of the power supply
manufacturers we've spoken with done the
same numbers as in December which with
Christmas there that's one of the
highest sign periods of the year and may
also did almost the same numbers as
November with Black Friday and Cyber
Monday another actually often the
highest selling point in the year period
so that means that some sectors are seen
holiday buying season numbers during
what's typically their low season and
because of the long lead time on
manufacturing and logistics that means
that no one was ready for this that's
really the problem here whatever was in
the warehouse when this all started it
vanished quickly and we were told that
companies could tell when the stimulus
checks started getting received by
Americans if you're not an American
viewer I'm sure many of the other
countries have some similar processes
but for Americans the there was a salary
threshold and you might have gotten
about twelve hundred bucks so for the
non-american viewers that's what we're
referring to and we talked about
stimulus checks that was from the
government to help deal with the
economic impact so the companies were
telling us that they knew as soon as the
stimulus check started getting deposited
because they saw an immediate ramp in
sales volume which is amusing in the
very least they get 1,200 bucks that's
about what it costs to buy a new
computer so it seems like that's what a
lot of people did but either way the
volume spiked on the first few days of
that and then the warehouses were mostly
depleted at that point so then it became
an issue of both supply and the man
where both are high but shipping is the
low part on the supply side so we asked
how close supply is to medium demand and
we were told that the power supplies are
getting close and depend on which
company we spoke with they they differed
here on the answer but depend on the
company the power supply manufacturers
are able to the factories are able to
keep up with the order volume again it's
just they can't get it out so both
Corsair and EVGA on record should have a
flood of power supplies hitting
retailers in early June so that'd be
about this week or next evj further
provided gamers Nexus with this
statement that we could give you all
they said quote we're starting to ramp
up supply start in early June you'll see
a lot more inventory across the board
start
for video cards and power supplies EJ
noted to us that its own EVGA store
website had often better inventory than
retailers because it's less visited at
less trafficked so first party stores
might be a good place to check if
there's no stock on major retailers a
lot of them have these now coarser has
some format EVGA does NZXT does so
that's a good place to check if you
can't get it elsewhere we next to asked
some video card manufacturers what
demand looks like there and we were told
that quote video card supply isn't even
close to meeting demand so it can supply
from AMD and NVIDIA isn't a problem but
demand is huge and no one anticipated
this happening as you likely know from
our factory tour videos the same exact
factories that make motherboards also
make video cards that means when one is
in demand they can shift lines to make
more of that part unfortunately with
both video cards and motherboards in
demand that means there's no load
balancing mechanism and they're overrun
SMT lines are also used for every other
PCB in your computer at some level so
those are also run into supply side
issues and speaking with resellers and
retailers off record we learned that
Amazon stopped buying power supplies and
graphics cards completely for most of
April and some of March which explains
some of the shortage there this was due
to logistical reasons like warehouse
base being filled with essential items
and freight companies getting filled
with those as well
Newegg has reportedly been doing its
best numbers in a long time
Amazon has just started buying again so
supply will begin to normalize there
with time a power supply maker told us
soft record that they have quote a lot
more inventory than usual but everyone
is buying it starting this week we're
getting a lot more supply if demand
keeps increasing it's hard to say if
that stuff will be readily available for
the average user I can tell you that
there will be a lot more shipping out
they told us another power supply
manufacturer told us that their supplier
factory is awaiting orders pending
phrase base so ultimately that TLDR is
shipping was the biggest issue but there
are more than that like margin being a
reason you can't just get faster
shipping but remember that the company
whose name is on the power supply they
do a lot of the the QC work they do a
lot of the specification they provide
the spec on how they wanted to be made
they helped work with the supplier on
maybe what new bells and whistles they
can find hey what's the new interesting
Marketing thing we can throw in there to
say it's higher efficiency on the PFC or
whatever but the companies that have
their label on it although they get a
lot of credit for making the product and
that is one of the most important parts
they're not the ones who are in the
factory assembling it so you have two
different parties here and both of them
have to be in alignment with supply
availability and with order quantity
otherwise nothing really gets done so
that's why it's it's a lot more complex
than just Corsair or EVGA making it
because they don't have their own
factories or then enter max or NZXT even
bigger in the case of NZXT where they
aren't that large of a power supply
makers so they have to rely on factories
and companies that do lower volume
aren't as high priority so they're gonna
have even more trouble getting back to
shelves for retail availability than the
biggest sellers of power supplies would
because they're the most valuable
customers have the supplier factories
but it depends on the supply orders that
are agreements that are in place
obviously we were told that most of the
manufacturers should have shipments
starting to flood at least the US by
June and that means other places as well
for Canada most of your shipments come
into port in the US and they get trucked
up sometimes they go to port and
Vancouver but that's what and that gets
into tariffs discussion to some of that
but that's a the window for availability
we were told that video card motherboard
and power supplies should start to
normalize for availability for sure in
q4 but it looks like it might normalize
by q3 it depends on which component
you're talking about video cards could
get interrupted in the middle if there's
a video card launch meant Vidya so we'll
see we'll see what happens there that's
the other problem too is to our
knowledge the board partners are not
currently manufacturing new cards for
NVIDIA GPUs in their factories and
they're pick-and-place lines and SMT
lines but as soon as they start getting
silicon from Nvidia there's gonna be a
stop to the existing supply so you're
just not gonna be any inventory if it's
already selling out now and they stopped
making that stuff to make something
that's not out yet so that's what you're
looking at for a complication of the
video card side that's it for this one
though if you want to support this type
of reporting you can go to store that
cameras Nexus dotnet and grab one of our
new Mouse mats they're on backorder as
are the mod mats because we're having
trouble getting those
or just like these companies are in that
way and they're on the way though and
we've got the dates on the website for
when the backward is arrived we're
pretty accurate with those often we
overshoot it so that you might end up
with it a bit early but you can check
stored on cameras access net to support
us there or patreon.com/scishow and is
thank you for watching another
investigative piece we really enjoy
doing these this is my personal favorite
type of piece to do so let us know what
other ones you want us to do it's just
it's a bunch of phone calls but that's
kind of fun so leave them in the
description in the comments below what
you want to see us do next we'll see you
all next time
[Music]